>> Kyle Simpson: All right.
So
our goal is to avoid side
effects wherever possible.
For example, this function organizes
itself with a direct input,
the x parameter.
And it has a direct output,
the return statement.
And that means that when we call
something online seven, and
we pass in the value zero,
the output that we get which we can choose
to assign to y if we want or not but that
output is entirely independent of anything
that happens before or after that line.
So, it takes that line to be a single,
individual line of reasoning
rather than having to reason about lines
1-6 to get to that point in the program.
Now, the takeaway should be avoid
side effects wherever possible.
But if you have some scenario
where you can't actually
write the function with no side effects,
maybe it's a function you don't control.
You still have to use
it in your system but
maybe it's something you don't control, so
you're not really allowed to change it.
There's a couple of things, a couple of
techniques that we can use to minimize
the impact of the side effects to
essentially hide those side effects,
if you will, so that they're not
polluting the rest of our code.
So we wanna talk about how we
can get to these pure functions.
That's the term for a function,
that doesn't have any side effects.
These are pure functions, return x and y.
Return x + y + z is not pure cuz we're
referencing a variable outside of itself.
So how do we purify a piece of
code that's not already pure?
What can we do?
>> Kyle Simpson: Well, the problem that
we have with this code is that there
is a set of inputs that are coming
from the lexical scope.
The x variable is a variable in that
lexical scope that f is able to access.
So if I wanted to in essence hide or
encapsulate that what I could do is create
a lexical scope around F that included
an X, so when F tried to access an X,
it was accessing one that was in this
enclosed, this encapsulated scope.
So, here's an example of that.
I made a capital F function, and
I have an x and, in this case, also a y.
I have the entire universe that the
lowercase f on line six would care about.
Both input indirect and output indirect.
I have that universe contained
within the lexical scope
of the F function from line one.
What that means is that when I run that
f function on line three it will produce
a side effect, but that side effect is
contained within the outer F function.
So the outer F function then
becomes as we see on line 13,
an actual pure function
from it's observable
behavior it has no side effects
on the rest of the program.
Line 13 will always
behave exactly that way.
If I pass in 0,
I will always get the value 3 back out.
I can call it over and over again and
I'll get the exact same three
with the exact same input, so
observably the capital F function is pure.
Even though on the inside it has
all this impurity happening,
it has all these side causes and
side effects happening.
Now, I show you this not because it is
common that you're going to be able to
wrap a function around
some other function.
The truth is if you have some function
in your app, and for whatever reason,
you're not allowed to change
the definition of the function,
you're also not likely to be able to
wrap a function around it lexically.
You're not likely to be able to
change anything about the file.
Maybe it's a function provided to
you by a third party library and
you load it dynamically and you don't
control it, so you can't change it.
So I don't really show you this to say,
this is how you're gonna
always fix these problems.
But I do wanna make a different point
here, which is the functional programmer
knows that the importance of functional
purity, that is avoiding the side
effects and side causes the importance
of that is observational not academic.
The importance of that is that
line 13 acts as a standalone.
It doesn't actually matter what
happens on the inside of f.
As long as the outer perception, the outer
observation of that function is that it
behaves as pure, then we're golden.
So, a principal that you will see.
And you'll see this play out many times
throughout the rest of this workshop
is that it doesn't need to
be turtles all the way down.
When we completely contain
all of those side effects,
it doesn't matter what
happens on the inside.
And as a matter of fact, it does matter.
You should seek to do it in
the most efficient way possible.
From the perspective of creating a utility
that then is going to be reused.
But there is clearly a trade off here,
because the uglier you make the code
inside of f the harder you make f itself
to understand and read and verify.
So if you go crazy and make it really
all kinds of arcane and all kinds of
wierd stuff going on, you might very well
make the rest of the program easy to
understand, because the rest of
the program looks like line 13,
very verifiable, very provable but
the stuff inside of f, not so great.
>> Kyle Simpson: So you wanna make those
changes only when performance triumphs
the readability, and
following where I'm coming from.
You don't wanna just write ugly side
effect code just because it's fun.
You want to cheat and use side effects and
use any other kinda trick in the book when
it's gonna help
the performance of the system.
And I guess I could say
the converse of that is,
if there's someplace in your system
that needs to cheat for performance,
then what you should do is encapsulate
those cheats, that side effect.
In a pure wrapper.
If there's something you need to do, like,
I need to push into the array instead of
creating a new array for each item that
I need to add into it, I need to mutate
my array, we'll talk about value and
mutability a bit later in the course.
If you need to push something in an array
because it's more efficient that way and
you are going to do this millions and
millions of times that's fine but
just encapsulate that in a function so
that that is not polluting
the rest of the program.
That's the goal of avoiding side effects.
And this is what we're going to
see over and over in this course.
My functional light pragmatic balance
between the academic concept and
what we need to do to ship code and
ship code that works.
I don't hear a lot of functional
programmers talking about that balance and
that trade off but it's core central
to premise that functional light is what
helps you start climbing the mountain.
>> Kyle Simpson: So one way of fixing this
problem was to completely encapsulate all
of the possible side effects, so
that they can't be observed by
the outside part of the program.
Where possible,
you should probably do it that way.
Maybe not gonna be possible all the time.
So, another technique, and
this one definitely feels a bit gross,
I totally understand that.
But another technique is to create
a function that acts as an interface
to the function in question.
So here,
lowercase stuff is not inside of f, but
f acts as an interface to that function.
You'll notice that f's job,
Capital F on line 5, its job is to capture
the current state, set to something
predictable, run the side effect,
capture the output state and then reset
everything as if nothing had changed.
>> Kyle Simpson: So when we run line 16,
during the running of line 16,
there are definitely side
effects happening in the system.
No question.
We are changing variables like the x and
y from 14.
We're definitely changing those as F runs.
But at the end of F, everything has been
set back to exactly the way it was before.
>> Kyle Simpson: So,
we go back to asking ourselves observably,
is capital F acting as a pure function?
Observationally, it is
acting as a pure function
because it has prevented us
from being able to observe or
worry about those side effects
throughout the rest of our programming.
Line 16 now can be understood in isolation
without having to run lines 1 through
15 of the code to figure it out.
There's no question this is gross and
there's no question that it would
be better to do it a different way.
But this is kind of your fall back to I
haven't been able to come up with any
other way to deal with the problem.
But I really want to prevent these side
effects from polluting all of my code and
making all of my code difficult to
understand and I'm going to use capital
F in lots of places, so
that could impact a lot of code.
I'm going to go to the trouble to do this.
By the way,
this is just a couple of variables.
If this was dozens of variables,
If it involved modifications to the dome,
if it involved network requests, fixing
that is going to be really challenging.
It's not going to be that straight forward
for you to do, I get that entirely.
But, you have to judge for
yourself in that pragmatic balance.
Is the benefit worth it?
Is it worth it to me to
got his extra step so
that I protect all the usages of that
through out the program from colluding.
Is there a question in chat here?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, just that if
the first function doesn't have a turn
does that mean it's not a function?
>> Kyle Simpson: Yeah, we're
deliberately saying is the F right here.
The one on line one, the lowercase f.
That's our running example of bad,
impure function.
That is our bad, impure function.
One of the reasons why it's impure is
it doesn't have a return statement.
Another reason why it's impure is
that it references an x variable
outside of itself.
So we're starting to build up for
ourselves a definition for
function purity.
And, we're actually going to evolve
this definition as we go along through
the course.
And it's not that when we get a new
definition it's going to replace it.
This is a little bit
more like a Rubix Cube.
And right now, we're going to look
at one face of the Rubix Cube.
We're going to look at the red side.
That's gonna give us a definition, but
that doesn't tell the full story
of what the Rubik's cube is.
So right now, our definition of functional
purity, looking only at the red side of
the Rubik's cube, is to suggest
that a pure function is a function
that does not have any access to variables
outside of itself that's observable.
>> Kyle Simpson: If a function accesses
something outside of itself, and
we can observe that access and
change something about it, or
it changes something about the state
of the system, it's not pure.